Humans versus LLMs: Optimising Prompting Strategies for ChatGPT and Gemini in APPRAISAL Annotation of English TED talks

This study experiments with prompting strategies for LLMs in automatic APPRAISAL annotation within the APPRAISAL Theory (Martin and White, 2005) and evaluates the effectiveness of prompts and models in annotating discursive linguistic features. Three large language models (LLMs) are used, specifically the ChatGPT tool and its models GPT-3.5 and GPT-4o, and Gemini 1.0 Pro. Two English transcripts of TED talks are used, in which 60 (30 per text) evaluative expressions are manually identified and annotated by human annotators, specifically graduate university students. Four annotators participated in the annotation, divided into two pairs. Each text is annotated by two annotators, who achieved an agreement on the classification of the evaluative expressions and whose annotation results present a gold standard. We then employ three prompting strategies (zero-shot, few-shot and a hybrid prompt) in which we include the list of pre-identified evaluative expressions asking LLMs to classify them at the most coarse-grained level of granularity for ATTITUDE (AFFECT, JUDGEMENT, and APPRECIATION) directly in the given TED transcripts and export the annotations in an XML format. The classification results of LLMs are compared to the gold standard provided by human annotators. We determine which prompting approach yields the highest agreement between LLMs and human annotators and assess whether one AI model outperforms the others. Our results indicate that the few-shot prompting strategy is the most efficient and that GPT-3.5 achieves considerable agreement with human annotators in classifying APPRAISAL categories within the ATTITUDE system. We present reproducible results and offer an optimised set of prompts for the annotation of APPRAISAL, assessing the effectiveness of AI tools in the domain of pragmatics and discourse analysis. This approach will inform future research aimed at improving AI tools for linguistic tasks related to pragmatic phenomena.
